CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Cybersecurity has become far more difficult as organizations move deeper into the digital world. Companies now rely on cloud services, online platforms, remote systems, and constantly connected devices. This has created many new entry points for attackers. At the same time, cybercriminals are no longer acting randomly. They use automated tools, carefully planned techniques, and well-organized methods to break into systems while staying hidden. Unfortunately, many security teams still depend on older approaches that were never designed for this scale or complexity. As a result, defenders are often forced to respond after damage has already begun, rather than preventing attacks early.
Traditional security operations rely on multiple separate tools such as log monitoring systems, vulnerability scanners, and incident response platforms. These tools usually operate in isolation and do not share information effectively. Each system generates its own alerts, often without enough context to understand what is truly happening. Security analysts are overwhelmed with notifications, many of which are false alarms or low-risk events. Valuable time is lost filtering noise instead of investigating real threats. Important patterns go unnoticed because data is spread across different tools, and lessons learned from past incidents are rarely reused. This leads to slow response times, exhausted analysts, and attackers remaining undetected for long periods.
Another major challenge is the heavy dependence on manual effort. Analysts are expected to review massive volumes of data, connect unrelated events, recall previous incidents, and make quick decisions under constant pressure. This approach does not scale as systems grow larger and more complex. Human attention becomes the bottleneck. While some automation exists, it is usually limited to predefined rules and scripts. These systems can follow instructions, but they lack the ability to adapt or understand context. Attackers, on the other hand, constantly change their techniques, making rigid defenses ineffective over time.
Cortexia is built to address these challenges by changing how security systems are structured. Instead of relying on disconnected tools, it brings all security functions into a single, unified platform. At the core of Cortexia is the ThreatFusion Brain, which acts as the system’s central decision-making layer. It gathers information from across the environment, links related events, builds a clear picture of what is happening, and determines appropriate actions. Rather than reacting to isolated alerts, it focuses on understanding complete attack scenarios, allowing threats to be detected earlier and handled more effectively.
Surrounding this core is a set of specialized components, each responsible for a specific security function. Some components continuously scan systems for vulnerabilities and prioritize them based on real-world risk instead of simple severity scores. Others examine suspicious files and behaviors to identify malicious activity. Additional components monitor logs, network traffic, and system activity to detect unusual patterns. These components operate independently but share information through a common memory layer. When one part of the system discovers something important, that knowledge becomes available to the entire platform.
A key strength of Cortexia is its ability to remember and improve over time. Most traditional security tools treat every incident as a one-time event and discard valuable context once it is resolved. Cortexia retains information about past incidents, investigation steps, and response outcomes. This stored knowledge helps the platform reduce false alerts, recognize recurring attack patterns, and respond more efficiently in the future. Over time, the system becomes more accurate and reliable by learning from experience rather than starting from scratch each time.
Human analysts remain an essential part of the process, but their role is significantly improved. The Blue Team Copilot serves as an intelligent assistant that presents information in clear and simple language. It summarizes security events, explains what is happening, and suggests next steps based on available context. Instead of spending hours digging through logs and dashboards, analysts can focus on making informed decisions and overseeing operations. The system is designed to be transparent, helping analysts understand why certain actions are recommended and building trust in automated processes.
Overall, Cortexia shifts cybersecurity from a reactive, manual process to a more organized and intelligent one. It reduces alert fatigue, improves visibility, and enables faster, more accurate responses to threats. By unifying security functions, preserving operational knowledge, and supporting analysts with clear insights, Cortexia delivers a stronger and more practical defense suited for modern digital environments.
\n
CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE SURVEY
2.1 Next Steps in Cyber Blue Team Automation — Leveraging the Power of     LLMs (2025)
Authors: A. Dijk, R. Meier, C. Melella 
This paper explores how Large Language Models (LLMs) and Generative AI can revolutionize blue team operations the defensive side of cybersecurity. Traditionally, blue teams depend heavily on manual work to review logs, triage alerts, write incident reports, and coordinate responses. These tasks are repetitive, time-consuming, and prone to fatigue and errors. The authors argue that the new generation of AI systems, particularly LLMs, can dramatically automate, assist, and enhance these processes.
The paper begins by outlining the current state of blue team operations, where human analysts must manually sift through massive amounts of network logs, alerts from SIEM systems, and vulnerability reports. The authors highlight how this process creates information overload and slows down incident response. 
They then introduce Generative AI and LLMs (like GPT models) as promising tools that can:
    • Understand natural language logs and alerts,
    • Summarize incidents or attack timelines automatically,
    • Generate human-readable explanations of complex threats, and
    • Recommend response actions or mitigation steps in real-time.
To demonstrate this, the authors use Locked Shields, a well-known NATO cyber defense exercise, as a case study. Locked Shields simulates large-scale cyberattacks where blue teams must defend critical systems. The paper analyzes how AI could support such exercises for example, by automatically reading event logs, correlating attack indicators, drafting reports, and suggesting defensive actions. In short, the paper envisions AI as a “copilot” for cybersecurity analysts — not replacing them, but augmenting their speed, accuracy, and comprehension.
The authors show examples where fine-tuned LLMs could automatically generate readable summaries from raw logs, helping analysts make faster, better-informed decisions. It also helps the analyst to understand in easy language making it easier to understand the concept.
Limitations of the paper :
    1. The challenge of high-quality labelled datasets: many blue team tasks don’t have large public datasets, which limits both model training and benchmarking.
    2. Integration complexity: embedding LLMs into existing SOC workflows, engines and tools is non-trivial (data formats, latency, model size).
    3. Prompt engineering and model explainability: LLMs may generate plausible responses but defenders need verifiable reasoning and audit trails.
    4. Computational resources and cost: deploying large LLMs at scale for real-time environment may be expensive.
2.2 A Systematic Review of Cyber Threat Intelligence: The Effectiveness of Technologies, Strategies, and Collaborations in Combating Modern Threats (2025)
Authors: P. Santos, R. Martins, F. Rodriguez, and A. Kumar
This paper is a systematic review of Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) — a field focused on collecting, analyzing, and sharing information about cyber threats to improve organizational defense. The authors examine how CTI has evolved in recent years and assess whether current tools, technologies, and collaboration practices are truly effective in preventing or mitigating cyberattacks.
The review highlights that cyber threat intelligence is now a cornerstone of modern cybersecurity, used by governments, enterprises, and research organizations. It plays a vital role in detecting patterns of malicious activity, predicting attacker behavior, and preparing proactive defenses. However, CTI is often under-utilized or fragmented because organizations struggle with data standardization, trust issues, and lack of integration between different CTI platforms.
The authors systematically analyze 43 selected academic and industrial studies (from 2018–2024) that describe or evaluate CTI systems, platforms, and frameworks. These include threat-intelligence feeds, collaborative sharing models, and AI-driven analysis tools. The paper breaks down the CTI ecosystem into four major areas:
    1. Technological Tools:
Covers the platforms and systems used to gather and analyze CTI data — including SIEMs, TIPs (Threat Intelligence Platforms), and automated feed processors. The paper reviews how AI and ML techniques are increasingly being added to detect patterns, correlate attack indicators, and identify advanced persistent threats (APTs) more quickly.
    2. Strategic Practices:
Looks at how organizations structure their threat-intelligence programs, including methods for prioritizing data, integrating CTI into daily security operations, and developing policies for data sharing and response coordination.
    3. Collaborative Models:
Discusses how organizations share intelligence with others — either through public/private partnerships, ISACs (Information Sharing and Analysis Centers), or ad-hoc collaboration groups. The review emphasizes that while collaboration increases visibility and early warning, it’s often hindered by legal, privacy, or trust concerns.
    4. Effectiveness and Metrics:
A key contribution of this paper is its focus on measuring CTI effectiveness — something many earlier reviews ignored. The authors look at how often CTI directly leads to faster detection, reduced incident impact, or cost savings. They note that many CTI systems still lack quantitative performance indicators, making it hard to prove their true value.
Throughout the paper, the authors emphasize that CTI isn’t just about gathering data it’s about transforming raw information into actionable intelligence. This means turning countless alerts, logs, and feeds into clear, prioritized insights that defenders can actually use.
However, the review also shows that most existing CTI systems are siloed, inconsistent, and manually intensive. Each organization often uses its own data format, taxonomy, and sharing protocol, resulting in poor interoperability. Moreover, because of competitive or regulatory restrictions, many entities hesitate to share full intelligence, limiting the global effectiveness of CTI initiatives. . It plays a vital role in detecting patterns of malicious activity, predicting attacker behavior, and preparing proactive defenses.
Limitations of the paper :
    1. Many CTI studies are qualitative or case-study based; fewer quantitative evaluations of “how much did CTI reduce attacks or losses”.
    2. Data sharing/trust remains a barrier: organizations may not share full threat intelligence for competitive or confidentiality reasons.
    3. There is lack of uniform standards for CTI formats, leading to integration challenges.
2.3 A Comprehensive Review and Assessment of Cybersecurity Vulnerability Detection Methodologies (2024)
Authors: K. Bennouk, M. El Yazid, A. El Omri 
This paper provides a detailed overview of the different techniques and tools that researchers and organizations use to find security vulnerabilities in software systems. A vulnerability is basically a weakness in code, configuration, or design that an attacker can exploit to gain unauthorized access or cause damage. Detecting these weaknesses early is crucial to maintaining secure systems — but doing so effectively remains a challenge.
The authors explain that over the years, many different approaches have been developed to identify vulnerabilities, but each comes with strengths and limitations. The paper groups these approaches into four main categories:
    1. Static Analysis:
This involves examining source code or binary files without running the program. Static tools look for insecure coding patterns, missing checks, or suspicious function calls. They are fast and can analyze large codebases, but they often produce false positives — flagging harmless code as dangerous because they can’t always see how the program actually behaves when executed.
    2. Dynamic Analysis:
This method tests a program while it’s running, observing its behavior in real time. Techniques like fuzz testing (feeding random or unexpected inputs) and sandbox analysis help discover vulnerabilities that only appear during execution. However, these tests can be slow, limited by test coverage, and might miss issues in unused parts of the code.
    3. Hybrid Approaches:
Many modern systems combine static and dynamic analysis to get the best of both worlds — using static scanning to find suspicious code and then verifying it through runtime testing. This helps reduce false alarms and improves accuracy.
    4. Machine Learning and AI-Based Detection:
The paper highlights a growing trend toward using AI models to automatically detect vulnerabilities. These systems can learn patterns from large datasets of known vulnerabilities (such as CVE databases) and predict where new ones might exist. For example, ML models can analyze source code syntax, API calls, or binary behavior to estimate which parts of software are most likely to be vulnerable.
In addition to detection methods, the authors also explore the role of vulnerability databases such as the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) list and the National Vulnerability Database (NVD). These databases serve as central sources of information on known flaws. However, the paper points out that many studies misuse or misunderstand this data — for example, by using incomplete or outdated entries — which leads to inconsistent detection results.
The review stresses that while research in vulnerability detection has advanced rapidly, many solutions are still tested only on curated or academic datasets, not on large-scale real-world software. This makes it difficult to know how these methods perform in complex enterprise environments. The paper therefore calls for broader, more realistic datasets and better benchmarks to measure how well detection models actually work in practice.
Overall, this review paints a clear picture of where vulnerability detection technology currently stands. It shows that traditional static and dynamic tools are still valuable but have limits in scalability and accuracy. Meanwhile, AI-based techniques bring promising automation but lack full transparency — analysts often can’t see why a model marks a specific piece of code as risky.
The authors conclude that the future of vulnerability detection should focus on combining AI-powered analysis, comprehensive data integration, and explainability. They recommend systems that can automatically connect vulnerability database information (like CVE identifiers, affected systems, and severity scores) with intelligent detection engines that learn and adapt over time.
Limitations of the paper :
    1. Many studies rely on curated or academic datasets, not full real-world proprietary code or large enterprise systems — which reduces generalizability.
    2. Vulnerability databases aren’t always accurately structured, contain missing data or delays, impacting detection systems relying on them.
    3. Static or dynamic methods often generate lots of false positives/negatives; ML-based detection sometimes lacks transparency or fails to scale to large codebases.
    4. This makes it difficult to know how these methods perform in complex enterprise environments.
2.4 A Survey on Malware Detection and Analysis (2024)
Authors: Joshua Smallman
This paper offers a comprehensive review of established malware detection methods used to identify, analyze, and mitigate malicious software that threatens computer systems worldwide. It categorizes detection approaches into several foundational techniques, including signature-based detection, behavior-based detection, static analysis, dynamic analysis, and hybrid detection systems. Each category is examined in terms of its operational principles, effectiveness, and practical limitations in modern cybersecurity environments.
Signature-based detection remains one of the most widely deployed techniques, relying on matching unknown files against a continuously updated database of known malware signatures. These methods are highly efficient and accurate for detecting previously identified threats and are commonly used in commercial antivirus solutions. However, their effectiveness is limited when confronting zero-day attacks, polymorphic malware, or obfuscated code that alters its appearance to evade signature matching.
To address these shortcomings, the survey explores anomaly-based and heuristic detection strategies, which focus on identifying suspicious patterns, abnormal system behavior, or deviations from established baselines. By analyzing system calls, resource usage, and execution patterns, these methods are capable of detecting previously unseen or evolving malware variants. While more flexible than signature-based techniques, they often suffer from higher false-positive rates and increased computational overhead.
The paper also examines static and dynamic analysis techniques in greater detail. Static analysis evaluates malware without execution by inspecting source code, binaries, or metadata, offering speed and safety advantages. In contrast, dynamic analysis involves executing suspected malware in controlled environments, such as sandboxes or virtual machines, to observe real-time behavior and interactions with the host system. Although dynamic analysis provides richer behavioral insights, it is more resource-intensive and can be evaded by malware designed to detect sandbox environments.
Furthermore, the review discusses host-based and network-based intrusion detection systems, highlighting how these approaches monitor system activities and network traffic to detect malicious behavior. Hybrid systems that combine multiple detection techniques are emphasized as increasingly important, as they leverage the strengths of individual methods while mitigating their weaknesses. By comparing the capabilities, applications, and empirical performance of these conventional approaches, the paper develops a broad and structured understanding of how malware detection techniques have been implemented and evolved in real-world cybersecurity contexts.
Limitations of the Paper :
    1. Dependency on Known Patterns: Signature-based detection cannot reliably detect zero-day malware or polymorphic variants that mutate signatures to evade matches. 
    2. Static Analysis Weaknesses: Static code analysis fails when malware uses obfuscation or packing techniques, as it cannot observe runtime behavior that reveals hidden malicious actions. 
    3. Dynamic Analysis Overheads: Dynamic detection methods require sandbox environments and execution monitoring, which can be resource-intensive and time-consuming, making real-time deployment difficult in high-throughput systems. 
\n

CHAPTER 3
EXISTING SYSTEM

3.1 Introduction to the Traditional Cybersecurity Paradigm

In today's hyper-connected and constantly evolving digital landscape, organizations across every sector are facing an unprecedented number and variety of cyber threats. From minor script-kiddie attacks to highly sophisticated, state-sponsored Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs), the sheer volume and complexity of cyber incidents have redefined the necessity of robust security measures. The concept of cybersecurity is no longer an optional IT function or a compliance checkbox; it is a critical pillar of business continuity and national security. A single successful data breach can lead to the exposure of millions of customer records, regulatory fines running into hundreds of millions of dollars, and permanent reputational damage that cripples an organization's ability to operate competitively.

Traditional cybersecurity systems, which still form the backbone of most large-scale enterprise defenses today, were originally designed during an era when the internet was smaller, threats were less organized, and network boundaries were well-defined. In those early days, a simple firewall placed at the network perimeter was often sufficient to keep attackers out. Security was thought of as a wall: build the wall high enough, and the attackers could not get in. However, the modern digital landscape bears no resemblance to this early paradigm. Today, employees work from home, access corporate resources from personal devices, store sensitive data in multiple cloud services, and connect to the company network from cafes, airports, and foreign countries. The traditional "wall" no longer has a clear boundary. Attackers have evolved from lone hackers to well-funded criminal syndicates and government-backed intelligence units.

Despite this radical transformation in the threat landscape, the majority of organizations continue to rely on the same fundamental security architecture that was designed decades ago. This paradigm generally centers on a highly compartmentalized and specialized approach. Organizations deploy a wide variety of independent software and hardware tools such as firewalls to monitor and filter perimeter traffic, intrusion detection systems (IDS) and intrusion prevention systems (IPS) to watch for unauthorized network access attempts, standalone antivirus (AV) software to scan endpoints for known malicious signatures, vulnerability scanners to identify unpatched software, and Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) systems to aggregate logs from these disparate sources into a central repository. While this "defense-in-depth" strategy provides multiple layers of security and each individual tool performs its designed function reasonably well, the fundamental architecture inherently lacks native, horizontal communication between the layers. Each component is built by a different vendor, uses its own proprietary data format, and generates its own unique alerts. The result is a profoundly disconnected ecosystem where tools generate massive amounts of raw data but produce very little correlated, actionable intelligence. The "defense-in-depth" model, in practice, often devolves into a "defense-in-chaos" situation.

3.1.1 The Architecture of Traditional Security Operations

To fully understand the limitations of the existing system, it is important to examine the architecture of a standard Security Operations Center (SOC). The traditional SOC operates primarily around the SIEM. The SIEM acts as a giant data vacuum, pulling in syslog messages from network routers and switches, Windows Event Viewer logs from corporate servers and workstations, application audit logs from critical business software, and network telemetry from firewalls and proxy servers. Every single second of the day, thousands upon thousands of events are ingested into the SIEM from across the entire enterprise environment. The SIEM then applies static, pre-written correlation rules to this massive data stream in an attempt to identify suspicious activity. For instance, a typical rule might dictate: "If a single user account fails to authenticate more than five times within a five-minute window, generate a brute-force attack alert." While these types of rules are effective at catching basic and well-documented attack patterns, they are incredibly rigid and easy for sophisticated attackers to circumvent. Modern attackers have learned exactly how these static correlation rules operate and have deliberately designed their operations to stay below these fixed thresholds. An attacker might spread their failed login attempts across several hours instead of five minutes, or use an army of compromised machines (a botnet) so that each individual source IP only makes a single login attempt, thus never triggering the "five failures from one source" rule. The static nature of SIEM rules means they can only catch attacks that precisely match the behavior the rule was written to detect, and they are completely blind to novel attack patterns.

Furthermore, traditional antivirus software operates primarily on signature-based detection models. In a signature-based model, the antivirus engine maintains a vast dictionary of known malware file hashes (such as MD5 or SHA-256) or specific byte sequences that are characteristic of particular malware families. When a user downloads a file or a new file appears on the system, the antivirus engine scans the file to see if its hash or byte patterns match any known entry in its signature database. If there is a match, the file is immediately quarantined or deleted. This approach works extremely well for detecting known, previously cataloged threats. However, its effectiveness breaks down completely when confronting new or slightly modified malware. If an attacker changes even a single line of code in their malicious program — a technique known as polymorphism — the resulting file hash changes entirely, becoming a completely new, unique string. The signature-based antivirus will completely fail to detect this polymorphic variant because it has never seen that specific hash before and has no signature for it. This fundamental limitation means that the existing system is heavily biased toward stopping threats from the past, rather than identifying new, novel variations or zero-day exploits that have never been seen before in the wild.

3.1.2 The Burden of Disconnected Tooling

The most critical and damaging flaw in the existing cybersecurity system is the total isolation and siloed nature of its components. Consider a typical enterprise network environment where the network firewall is manufactured and sold by Vendor A, the endpoint detection and response (EDR) solution is built by Vendor B, the vulnerability scanner is provided by Vendor C, and the SIEM is purchased from Vendor D. Because these software companies are direct competitors in the cybersecurity marketplace, their products are rarely designed to communicate seamlessly with one another. They use different internal data formats and schemas, different severity scoring systems (some use numeric scales while others use text labels like "High" or "Critical"), different naming conventions for common threat types, and fundamentally different user interfaces.

When an attacker launches a coordinated, multi-stage attack against an organization, this lack of integration between defensive tools becomes absolutely disastrous and creates enormous blind spots for the security team. Consider a realistic and common attack scenario where an external threat actor discovers through reconnaissance that a company's public-facing web server is running an outdated, unpatched version of the Apache HTTP Server software which contains a known vulnerability. The attacker exploits this vulnerability to upload a small malicious payload (a reverse shell script) to the web server. Once the payload is uploaded, the attacker executes it to gain administrative command-line access to the server. With full control of the server, the attacker then begins quietly and slowly transferring sensitive customer database records to an external server they control, exfiltrating gigabytes of data over several hours using encrypted channels to avoid detection.

In a traditional fragmented security setup, this single, unified, and devastating attack chain would be experienced by the security team as multiple, completely disjointed alerts spread across different dashboards:
- The vulnerability scanner (which typically runs on a weekly or bi-weekly schedule rather than continuously) might have already noted the Apache vulnerability in its last scan report, but this report is sitting as a PDF document in an IT administrator's email inbox, completely disconnected from the active monitoring systems. Nobody has gotten around to patching it yet because the team has a backlog of hundreds of other vulnerabilities to address.
- The Web Application Firewall (WAF) might trigger a low-severity alert about unusual or malformed HTTP POST requests targeting the web server, but this alert is generated in the WAF's own management console, which most SOC analysts do not monitor in real time.
- The endpoint detection and response (EDR) software running on the web server might notice a strange child process spawning from the Apache web server process (which is abnormal behavior), triggering a medium-severity alert in its own separate dashboard.
- The network monitoring tool might detect an unusually large outbound data transfer from the web server to an unknown external IP address, generating yet another separate alert in the network monitoring console.

Because the existing system architecture cannot automatically stitch these four individual alerts together and present them as a single, coordinated attack narrative, the SIEM simply dumps four different, seemingly unrelated alerts into the analyst's incident queue alongside hundreds of other alerts from that day. It is entirely up to the human security analyst to randomly stumble upon these four specific alerts, recognize that they might be related, open them in separate browser tabs, manually compare the timestamps to establish a timeline, realize that they are all occurring on the same web server, and then manually deduce from this evidence that a massive data breach is actively in progress. By the time this exhausting manual correlation process is completed — which can take hours or even days depending on the analyst's workload — the attacker has typically already achieved their objective, stolen the data, cleaned up their traces, and disappeared from the network.

3.1.3 The Real-World Consequences: Alert Fatigue

Because existing security systems generate individual alerts for every single irregular event rather than intelligently correlating them into comprehensive incident reports, they produce an unsustainable and overwhelming volume of noise. Research conducted by major cybersecurity firms has consistently shown that a moderate-sized Security Operations Center can easily receive upward of ten thousand security alerts per day. Some large enterprise SOCs report receiving over one hundred thousand alerts daily. The vast majority of these alerts — often upward of ninety-five percent — turn out to be false positives upon investigation.

Security analysts working in a traditional SOC are forced into a state of continuous, high-speed triage. They must rapidly glance at an alert, quickly scan the raw telemetry data associated with it, and make a split-second judgment on whether to investigate the alert further or close it as a "false positive" and move on to the next one. A false positive occurs when the security tool incorrectly flags legitimate, normal business activity as malicious or suspicious. For example, a system administrator running a custom PowerShell script to automate routine network maintenance tasks might trigger a severe "Obfuscated PowerShell Execution Detected" alert because their script uses an encoded command parameter, which is a technique also commonly used by attackers. The alert is technically correct in its detection — encoded PowerShell was indeed used — but the context makes it completely benign. The analyst must manually determine this context every single time.

Over time, this relentless, never-ending flood of false positive alerts induces a well-documented psychological condition known as "Alert Fatigue." Analysts become progressively desensitized to the constant stream of warnings. Their brains begin to expect that every alert is another false positive, because statistically, this is almost always the case. As they race through their queues trying to keep up with the volume, they begin to automatically assume that alerts are benign and close them with increasingly less scrutiny. This creates an extremely dangerous environment where a critical, true-positive alert — indicating an actual, real, ongoing data breach or ransomware attack — is accidentally ignored, dismissed without proper investigation, or simply lost and buried under thousands of other notifications. Several of the most financially damaging data breaches in the history of cybersecurity occurred not because the security detection systems failed to identify the attacker, but because the legitimate alert was buried under an avalanche of false positives and was subsequently ignored by an exhausted, overstretched analyst who was simply doing their best to manage an impossible workload.

3.1.4 Manual Incident Response and Lack of Automation

Even in the scenarios where a security analyst successfully detects and confirms a coordinated attack within the existing system, the process of actually responding to and mitigating the threat remains extremely slow and laboriously manual. Mitigation and incident response processes in traditional SOC environments rely heavily on static documents known as "runbooks" or "playbooks." These documents are essentially step-by-step instruction manuals that describe the exact sequence of actions an analyst should take when a specific type of incident is confirmed.

When an analyst conclusively determines that Server A is actively infected with malware, they must consult the appropriate runbook. They must manually log into the firewall management console to create a new rule blocking the attacker's command-and-control IP address. They must then separately log into the endpoint management software platform to issue a command to isolate Server A from the rest of the corporate network. Next, they must open a remote terminal session to the infected server, identify the malicious process, kill it, and manually delete the malicious files from the file system. Following that, they must manually search through public patch databases (such as the National Vulnerability Database) to find the specific software update and version number that will close the initial vulnerability that allowed the attacker in. Finally, they must download this patch, test it, and deploy it to the server. Throughout this entire multi-step process, they are also required to meticulously document every single action they take in an incident report for compliance and audit purposes.

This manual chain of actions is extremely slow, inherently prone to human error under stress, and completely unsuited for modern, high-speed automated attacks. Ransomware, for instance, can encrypt thousands of files across an entire network share in under sixty seconds. If an analyst needs even fifteen minutes to complete their manual runbook workflow, the damage may already be done many times over before any containment action is taken.

3.1.5 The "Amnesia" Flaw: A System Without Operational Memory

A striking and profound limitation of the existing cybersecurity architecture is its total absence of contextual, operational memory. Modern SIEMs and antivirus platforms operate largely in a state of continuous amnesia, processing each event in complete isolation from all previous events. They focus exclusively on the "now" without any structured awareness of the "before."

For example, consider a vulnerability scanner that detects a missing critical Microsoft Windows security patch on a particular server on Monday morning. It dutifully generates an alert and adds it to the day's scan report. If the IT team does not apply this patch that day (perhaps because they are overwhelmed with other tasks), the scanner will detect the same missing patch again on Tuesday morning and generate a brand new, separate alert for it. It will do the same on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. At no point does the existing system understand or track the "lifecycle" of this vulnerability — the fact that it was first discovered on Monday, that it has remained unpatched for five consecutive days, and that its risk is growing with each passing day as attackers have more time to develop exploits for it. Each day, the system treats the finding as an entirely new, isolated event.

Similarly, if an attacker launches a carefully designed "low and slow" attack against an organization's email server — for instance, submitting just two or three incorrect password attempts against a specific user account every single week for six straight months — the existing system will almost certainly dismiss these individual events. Each event falls far below the threshold of any SIEM correlation rule (which typically requires five or more failures within five minutes). The system utterly fails to remember the historical context that this specific external IP address has been quietly and persistently probing the same user account for half a year. This type of slow, patient attack is characteristic of highly sophisticated Advanced Persistent Threats, and without persistent memory and long-term pattern tracking, the existing system is structurally incapable of detecting them.

3.1.6 Analytical Barriers and the Cybersecurity Skills Gap

Traditional security systems present their findings in formats that are extremely hostile and inaccessible to the human operators tasked with interpreting them. System logs, the primary output of security tools, are generated in dense, machine-oriented language. They are filled with complex hexadecimal memory addresses, cryptic numerical error codes, obscure protocol identifiers, and confusing operating-system-specific event identifiers. When a Windows Security Event Log reads "Event ID 4624: An account was successfully logged on. Logon Type 3. Authentication Package: NTLM. Source Network Address: 198.51.100.47," the information is technically all there. However, an entry-level security analyst might not immediately understand the critical implications of an NTLM Logon Type 3 authentication originating from an unfamiliar external IP address — specifically, that this could indicate a "pass-the-hash" lateral movement attack, which is a technique where an attacker uses stolen password hashes to authenticate to remote systems without ever knowing the actual password.

Because the raw logs and alerts are not written in human-readable, natural language, and because the tools themselves provide no explanatory context or suggested next steps, organizations are forced to rely heavily on a small number of highly experienced, senior security engineers who have spent years developing the deep technical knowledge required to "translate" the raw data into meaningful intelligence. However, the cybersecurity industry is currently facing a widely documented and massive global skills shortage. Industry reports consistently estimate that there are millions of unfilled cybersecurity positions worldwide. There simply are not enough experienced, senior-level security engineers available to staff every Security Operations Center that needs them. As a direct consequence, organizations frequently staff their SOCs with junior analysts who, despite being intelligent and eager, lack the years of hands-on experience necessary to interpret the incredibly complex and nuanced outputs of their security tools with confidence and accuracy. This skills gap leads to delayed investigations, frequent misinterpretations of alert data, and ultimately, security incidents that could have been prevented with better tooling that provides built-in intelligence and explanation.

3.2 Economic and Strategic Disadvantages of the Existing Paradigm

The reliance on fragmented, manual, and reactive security systems translates directly into significant economic damage and strategic disadvantages for organizations. Maintaining a suite of five or more distinct, enterprise-grade security software tools requires enormous licensing fees paid annually to each respective vendor. Each tool requires its own dedicated server infrastructure to host, its own database for storage, and its own team of administrators to maintain and update it. On top of these direct costs, organizations must invest heavily in training programs to teach their SOC analysts how to effectively use five or six completely different software interfaces, each with its own learning curve, its own query language, and its own workflow.

Strategically, the existing system architecture leaves organizations in a permanent posture of reaction rather than proactive prevention. Because the system lacks an automated end-to-end pipeline that connects vulnerability discovery directly to patch deployment, organizations often suffer from enormous "patch gaps" — the time between when a vulnerability is publicly discovered and when it is actually fixed on all affected systems. Attackers are acutely aware of these gaps and actively exploit them. When a new critical vulnerability is publicly disclosed, attackers immediately begin scanning the internet for organizations that have not yet applied the patch. The longer the patch gap, the greater the window of opportunity for the attacker. In many documented breach cases, the vulnerability that was exploited had been publicly known and had a freely available patch for weeks or even months before the attack occurred.

3.3 Limitations Summary of the Existing System

1. Utterly Reactive Posture: The existing system acts simply as an alarm system. It is designed to ring a bell after a breach has occurred or is actively in progress. It does not anticipate attacker behavior, does not proactively harden defenses before an attack can succeed, and does not adapt its defensive posture based on the current threat level.

2. Siloed Compartmentalization: The complete lack of native integration between the various defensive tools means security teams are always operating with significant blind spots. They never have access to a single, unified, holistic dashboard or data model that paints a complete, real-time picture of the security health of the entire environment.

3. Unsustainable Human Workload: Asking human analysts to accurately and consistently process thousands of complex data points per minute, around the clock, seven days a week, is biologically impossible. This unsustainable workload guarantees that critical mistakes will be made, that genuine alerts will be missed, and that successful breaches will occur.

4. Total Lack of Incident Learning: Without an integrated, persistent memory database that tracks the lifecycle of threats and vulnerabilities over time, the system cannot recognize long-term patterns, cannot identify that a specific server or user account is being persistently targeted, and cannot learn from past incidents to improve future detection accuracy.

5. Inflexible and Static Mitigation: Pre-written, static runbook responses cannot adapt to attackers who constantly alter their methods, change their malware code structures, and rotate their infrastructure specifically to bypass known defensive rules.

3.4 The Compelling Need for a Fundamentally Superior Architecture

The weaknesses outlined in the preceding sections demonstrate conclusively that simply adding more individual tools to the security stack, hiring more analysts to manually process the ever-growing flood of alerts, or writing more static SIEM correlation rules is no longer a sustainable or effective strategy for securing modern digital environments. A fundamentally new architectural paradigm is required — one that is built from the ground up to break down the walls between different security capabilities, to natively integrate data from all sources into a single correlated stream of intelligence, to persistently remember past events and learn from them over time, and to automatically generate precise, actionable remediation steps for the human operators. This fundamental shift from fragmented reaction to unified intelligence is the core design philosophy behind the proposed SentinelNexus system described in the following chapters.


CHAPTER 4
PROPOSED SYSTEM

The proposed system, titled SentinelNexus, represents a fundamental paradigm shift away from the fragmented, disconnected, and reactive methods of cybersecurity defense that characterize the existing system architecture described in the preceding chapter. Where the existing system relies on multiple isolated tools that generate disparate, uncorrelated alerts requiring massive manual effort to interpret, SentinelNexus introduces an elegant, unified, and deeply practical application of autonomous security operations that consolidates all critical defensive functions into a single, cohesive, and tightly integrated platform.

Instead of requiring human operators to constantly bridge the gap between disconnected software suites by manually copying data between interfaces and mentally correlating events across multiple dashboards, SentinelNexus incorporates all of its diverse analytical functions into one cohesive backend. It functions as a single source of truth for the entire security posture: gathering system logs, analyzing suspicious files for malware using multiple independent engines, checking all installed software packages for known vulnerabilities, correlating all findings into unified threat events, and orchestrating response recommendations — all from within a single, centralized Python-based backend server. This backend exposes all of its intelligence through a comprehensive set of RESTful API endpoints, which are consumed by a modern, real-time frontend dashboard that presents the results to the analyst in a clean, actionable, and visually intuitive manner.

SentinelNexus is designed not just to passively send raw alerts, but to actively generate actionable, deeply context-aware intelligence. At the heart of this proposed system is a powerful correlation layer — the ThreatSentinel Engine — that independently processes and cross-references findings from all underlying scanners before presenting them to the user. If ClamAV detects a suspicious file, the system does not simply display the ClamAV alert. Instead, it simultaneously runs the file through the YARA static behavioral analysis engine, computes its cryptographic hashes, queries those hashes against the global VirusTotal intelligence database, and then fuses all of these independent findings into a single, comprehensive threat report. This multi-engine consensus approach dramatically increases detection confidence and significantly reduces the false positive rates that plague traditional single-engine solutions.

4.1 Objectives of the Proposed System

The following objectives guided the design and implementation of every module within SentinelNexus:

Objective 1: Unified Singleton Security Platform
The primary and most important goal of SentinelNexus is to completely eliminate the need for security analysts to switch between multiple monitors, dashboards, and vendor-specific software interfaces. In our proposed system, all security-related data — whether it originates from a vulnerability scanner, a malware detection engine, a host telemetry collector, or a threat intelligence feed — is ingested by the centralized backend, normalized into a consistent internal data format, and displayed within one single, comprehensive user interface. Every piece of security intelligence is accessible from a single browser tab. The analyst no longer needs to maintain separate logins for five different security products or remember different query languages for different vendor tools. This unification dramatically reduces the cognitive overhead on the analyst and eliminates the dangerous blind spots that occur when data is trapped inside isolated product silos.

Objective 2: Intelligent Automated Detection and Multi-Engine Correlation
The system is designed to completely eliminate the manual guesswork that dominates traditional security operations. Its objective is to automatically cross-reference and validate findings from multiple independent detection engines. In our implementation, when a file is analyzed, it is simultaneously scanned by the ClamAV antivirus signature engine for known malware, analyzed by the YARA static behavioral analysis engine against thousands of community-sourced and built-in behavioral rules, and its SHA-256 hash is submitted to the VirusTotal API for validation against over seventy independent global security vendors. The ThreatSentinel Correlation Engine then fuses these independent results, applying weighted severity calculations to generate a single, high-confidence threat verdict. This multi-engine consensus approach means the system provides a confirmed, validated verdict without requiring the analyst to manually investigate each individual scanner's output in isolation.

Objective 3: Operational Persistent Memory
A critical objective of SentinelNexus is to construct an operational "memory" that persists across system reboots and scan cycles. Our implementation maintains a structured SQLite relational database that tracks every incident the system has ever detected, including its severity, the scanner that originated it, its current status (open or resolved), and the exact timestamp it was first and last observed. The system also maintains a dedicated patterns table that tracks recurring threat signatures over time, incrementing a hit count every time the same signature is observed again. This historical baseline allows the system to dramatically reduce repetitive alert noise (by recognizing an alert it has already generated), identify persistent and recurring threats that span across multiple days or weeks, and provide the analyst with a rich historical context when investigating a current incident.

Objective 4: Clear, Natural Language Explainability
Cybersecurity logs and alert outputs are notoriously difficult to read and interpret, particularly for entry-level or junior analysts. Raw YARA rule match outputs, hexadecimal memory offset values, ClamAV detection strings, and CVE identifiers are all deeply technical and require years of experience to interpret correctly. A core objective of SentinelNexus is to integrate Large Language Model (LLM) technology seamlessly into the platform through the Blue Team Copilot feature. The Copilot allows the platform to translate these cryptic technical outputs into simple, conversational, human-readable language. An analyst can ask the Copilot, "Explain the current threat situation," and receive a plain-English summary that describes exactly what has been found, why it is dangerous, and what they should do about it. This bridges the cybersecurity skills gap by empowering analysts of all experience levels to respond confidently and accurately to security incidents.

Objective 5: Action-Oriented Remediation Generation
Instead of merely telling the analyst that an outdated software library has a known vulnerability (which is what existing systems do), SentinelNexus's objective is to go significantly further. The PatchMaster module automatically determines the specific package manager ecosystem associated with the vulnerable library (whether it is pip for Python, npm for Node.js, apt for Debian-based Linux systems, yum for Red Hat systems, gem for Ruby, cargo for Rust, or go for Golang). Based on this programmatic classification, PatchMaster automatically generates the exact terminal command that the analyst needs to execute to upgrade the vulnerable package to a secure version. This transforms a vague "vulnerability found" alert into an immediate, precise, copy-paste-ready remediation action.

4.2 System Architecture of the Proposed Model

The architecture of SentinelNexus is logically divided into five distinct but deeply intertwined functional layers. Each layer is responsible for a specific aspect of the security pipeline, and all layers communicate through the centralized backend, which is built on the Python FastAPI framework for maximum speed and asynchronous performance.

Layer 1: The Analytical and Telemetry Layer (The Scanners)
This foundational layer is responsible for gathering raw security data directly from the host environment. It consists of multiple independent scanning engines, each specialized for a different type of threat:

Wazuh (SIEM and Security Agent): Acts as the primary endpoint watcher and host-based intrusion detection system. It continuously collects detailed information about process creations, network socket connections, file integrity changes, and system log events across the host operating system. Wazuh provides the baseline infrastructure visibility upon which other layers build their analysis. In our implementation, we integrate with the Wazuh API through custom client modules that fetch and normalize alert data.

MalwareMind (YARA + ClamAV + VirusTotal): This is a triple-engine malware analysis pipeline that represents the core of our file-level threat detection capability. ClamAV provides fast, signature-based scanning for known malware families. YARA provides deep static behavioral analysis using complex pattern-matching rules that can identify obfuscated threats, shellcode, reverse shells, and suspicious code patterns based on byte sequences and string patterns. VirusTotal provides global intelligence validation by querying the SHA-256 hash of any scanned file against over seventy independent commercial antivirus engines worldwide. This triple-engine approach means that even if one engine misses a threat, the other two engines provide additional layers of detection.

Vulnerability Scanners (Trivy and OSV): These automated tools silently inspect the system's installed software libraries, operating system packages, and language-specific dependencies (such as Python pip packages, Node.js npm modules, and system-level apt packages) to detect known, published Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs). Trivy provides comprehensive filesystem-level vulnerability scanning with detailed severity ratings and version information, while OSV provides an additional layer of advisory-based vulnerability intelligence.

Telemetry Collectors: A suite of specialized Python modules that collect real-time host telemetry data, including detailed system hardware information, running processes and their resource consumption, active network connections, recently modified files, installed software inventories, and running system services. This telemetry data provides critical contextual awareness that enables the correlation layer to make informed severity judgments.

Layer 2: The Correlation Layer (ThreatSentinel Engine)
The ThreatSentinel Correlation Engine is the analytical "brain" of SentinelNexus. This is where the platform fundamentally differentiates itself from traditional, fragmented security systems. Rather than simply passing raw scanner outputs directly to the frontend dashboard (which would result in the same overwhelming flood of uncorrelated alerts that plague existing systems), ThreatSentinel performs a sophisticated multi-source correlation process.

The engine ingests the raw, disorganized JSON output files produced by every scanner in the Analytical Layer. It reads ClamAV malware detection results, YARA rule match reports, VirusTotal lookup responses, Trivy vulnerability findings, and Wazuh host alerts. It then processes each finding through a structured severity normalization pipeline, converting the different severity scales used by different tools (Trivy uses text labels like "CRITICAL" and "HIGH," ClamAV uses detection counts, YARA rules have severity metadata) into a single, unified internal severity scale. After normalization, ThreatSentinel constructs unified ThreatEvent objects that group related findings together. If Trivy finds a critical operating system vulnerability on a server, and ClamAV simultaneously flags a malicious file on the same server, ThreatSentinel correlates these two findings into a single, escalated ThreatEvent with maximum priority. The events are then sorted by severity (critical first, low last) and persisted as a JSON snapshot for the frontend to consume.

Additionally, every threat event generated by the correlator is simultaneously written to the persistent SQLite Memory Database and its signature is tracked in the patterns table. This tight integration between the Correlation and Memory layers ensures that the system's intelligence grows with every scan cycle.

Layer 3: The Persistent Memory Layer (SQLite State Database)
Unlike traditional security systems that forget their state every time they reboot or finish a scan cycle, SentinelNexus utilizes an embedded SQLite relational database that provides full persistence across application restarts. The database is structured around two core tables:

The incidents table stores a complete record of every security incident the system has ever detected. Each record includes a unique identifier, the exact timestamp of detection, the type of incident (malware detection, vulnerability, YARA detection, or host alert), the normalized severity level, the name of the scanner that originated the finding, a human-readable title, detailed JSON metadata, and the current status (open or resolved).

The patterns table tracks recurring threat signatures over time. Every time a scanner detects a threat that matches a previously seen signature (for example, the same YARA rule firing on the same file, or the same CVE being detected in consecutive scans), the system does not generate a duplicate incident. Instead, it updates the existing pattern record by refreshing the last_seen timestamp and incrementing the hit_count counter. This elegant upsert mechanism drastically reduces the alert noise presented to the analyst while simultaneously building a rich historical record of threat persistence.

Layer 4: The Remediation Layer (PatchMaster Advisor)
Once vulnerabilities are identified and correlated, the PatchMaster module activates to close the remediation gap that plagues existing systems. PatchMaster reads the structured vulnerability data from the Trivy and OSV scan results. For each discovered CVE, it programmatically identifies the package manager ecosystem that the vulnerable package belongs to by analyzing the package type metadata provided by the scanner. It supports seven distinct package manager ecosystems: pip for Python packages, npm for Node.js modules, apt for Debian and Ubuntu system packages, yum for Red Hat and CentOS packages, gem for Ruby gems, cargo for Rust crates, and go for Golang modules. Based on this identification, the module automatically formulates the exact terminal command necessary to safely update the vulnerable library to the fixed version (if one is available). It also generates a direct reference URL linking to the official vulnerability advisory. Each recommendation includes a boolean flag indicating whether the vulnerability can be automatically patched, enabling future automation capabilities.

Layer 5: The Presentation and AI Layer (React Dashboard and Blue Team Copilot)
The frontend of SentinelNexus is an aesthetically modern, dark-themed React web application that serves as the analyst's command center and control plane. It is built using the Vite build tool for blazing-fast development server performance, styled with Tailwind CSS for a clean and responsive layout, and uses the Recharts library for dynamic, interactive data visualization. The dashboard visualizes the current system Risk Score (computed by the Risk Scoring Engine), real-time telemetry charts showing CPU and memory utilization, active incident queues sortable by severity and status, PatchMaster remediation recommendations, and historical scan trends.

Integrated directly into this visual layer is the Blue Team Copilot — an AI conversational interface that connects to an underlying Large Language Model. In our implementation, we support two AI backends: a local Ollama instance for privacy-sensitive deployments where no data should leave the network, and Google Gemini for enhanced intelligence when cloud connectivity is acceptable. The Copilot has full visibility into the current system context: it reads the latest vulnerability counts, malware verdicts, YARA hits, VirusTotal positives, and open incident summaries, and injects this context directly into the LLM prompt. This grounding mechanism ensures that when an analyst asks a question, the AI's response is factually accurate and specifically relevant to the current state of the analyst's own network, rather than providing generic textbook answers.

4.3 Tools and Technologies Utilized in the Codebase

Our codebase relies on a carefully selected modern technology stack aimed at maximizing speed, reliability, and seamless integration:

Backend and API Routing (Python and FastAPI): FastAPI serves as the core backend orchestration framework. It allows us to build extremely fast, asynchronous REST API endpoints that handle concurrent requests without blocking. This is critical because the system must serve frontend dashboard requests with low latency even while heavy scanning operations are running in background threads. The auto_scanner module uses APScheduler (a Python background task scheduler) and ThreadPoolExecutor (Python's concurrent thread pool) to execute scan pipelines on automated schedules without interrupting the API server's responsiveness.

Static Threat Analysis (YARA via yara-python): The yara-python library is deeply integrated into our codebase to compile and execute complex pattern-matching rules against incoming files. Our implementation loads over one thousand community-sourced rules from the Neo23x0/signature-base Git repository alongside six custom built-in rules that cover common threat patterns including obfuscated PowerShell, bash reverse shells, hardcoded credentials, base64 shellcode, and embedded executable magic bytes.

Global Intelligence (VirusTotal API v3 via requests): Using Python's requests library, we send SHA-256 cryptographic hashes of observed files to the VirusTotal public API v3 to query over seventy independent global security vendor engines simultaneously. Our implementation handles all edge cases including rate limiting for the free tier (four requests per minute with fifteen-second delays between lookups), missing API keys, network errors, HTTP 404 responses for unknown hashes, and invalid API key responses.

Signature Matching (ClamAV): The open-source ClamAV antivirus engine is invoked through Python's subprocess module to perform fast, known-signature scanning of file system directories. ClamAV is called with the recursive and infected-only flags to maximize scan efficiency.

Data Persistence (SQLite via Python's sqlite3): Using Python's built-in sqlite3 library, we created a lightweight, self-contained relational database that requires no external database server infrastructure. The database provides ACID-compliant persistent storage for incident records, pattern tracking, and system state management across application restarts.

Frontend User Interface (React, Vite, and Tailwind CSS): The Single Page Application dashboard is bootstrapped with Vite for near-instant hot module replacement during development. React provides the component-based rendering architecture, Tailwind CSS delivers the utility-first styling for a sleek, responsive, dark-themed interface, and Recharts renders interactive telemetry and trend charts.

Local AI Inference (Ollama LLM): By integrating Ollama, the platform can run advanced Generative AI models entirely on the local machine. This ensures that highly sensitive security scan data and internal system logs never leave the organization's secure network perimeter, providing intelligent Copilot features with complete data privacy. The ai_router module communicates with the Ollama API endpoint using structured prompts that include a detailed system prompt defining the Copilot's role and behavior rules, along with real-time scan context injected from the backend's data stores.


CHAPTER 5
DESIGN & IMPLEMENTATION

5.1 DESIGN PHILOSOPHY OF THE SENTINELNEXUS ARCHITECTURE

The design of SentinelNexus is strictly rooted in three foundational principles: determinism, transparency, and autonomy. Every architectural decision made during the design phase was evaluated against these three principles to ensure that the resulting platform would be fundamentally different from the "black-box" security products that dominate the existing market.

Determinism: The first and most important design principle is that every critical security decision made by the platform — every severity assignment, every risk score calculation, every threat event prioritization — must be the result of a deterministic, mathematically reproducible algorithm. If the system scores the platform risk at seventy-five out of one hundred (CRITICAL), the analyst must be able to trace exactly which inputs contributed to that score: how many ClamAV infections were detected, how many YARA rule hits occurred, how many VirusTotal engines flagged a hash, and how many critical and high-severity vulnerabilities were found. There is no randomness, no probabilistic guessing, and no AI-generated severity scores. The Risk Scoring Engine uses fixed, weighted arithmetic to produce its output, guaranteeing that the same set of scan inputs will always produce the same risk score.

Transparency: The second principle mandates that the system must never be an opaque "black box." Every action the system takes, from triaging a vulnerability to generating a remediation command, can be structurally explained and reviewed by a human analyst. When PatchMaster generates the command "pip install --upgrade requests==2.31.0", the analyst can see exactly why: Trivy detected CVE-2023-32681 in the requests package version 2.28.0, PatchMaster identified the package ecosystem as pip based on the scan metadata, and it formulated the upgrade command targeting the fixed version 2.31.0 as specified in the Trivy report. Every step is traceable and auditable.

Autonomy: The third principle is that the system should require minimal manual intervention after deployment. The auto_scanner module is designed to autonomously execute complete scan cycles on automated schedules: vulnerability scans every two hours, malware scans (ClamAV + YARA + VirusTotal) every two hours and fifteen minutes, telemetry snapshots every hour, and ThreatSentinel correlation every two hours and thirty minutes. The system also triggers all pipelines immediately upon startup. This design ensures that the platform begins protecting the environment from the first second it is running, without requiring the analyst to manually initiate any scan.

A crucial design decision was to keep the Artificial Intelligence (the LLM) completely segregated from the structural decision-making logic. The deterministic Correlation Engine and the Risk Scoring Engine use fixed algorithms to assign severity and match threats. The AI Copilot is strictly utilized as a translating and summarizing assistant: it reads the deterministic outputs and explains them in human language. This architectural separation guarantees that the system's core defenses are never vulnerable to AI hallucinations, prompt injection attacks, or statistical errors that are inherent in probabilistic language models. The structural integrity of the security pipeline remains mathematically reliable, while the AI provides a powerful natural language interface on top of it.

The architecture was also designed around asynchronous execution patterns. Heavy scanning tasks (ClamAV filesystem scans, YARA rule compilation, VirusTotal API lookups) are executed in background threads managed by Python's ThreadPoolExecutor, ensuring that the FastAPI web server remains highly responsive to frontend dashboard requests at all times. The APScheduler library manages the timing of automated scan cycles, running in the background as a daemon process that does not block the main application thread.

5.2 DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION OF CODEBASE MODULES

5.2.1 Deep YARA Engine Integration (scanner.py)

The YARA engine implementation, located in backend/app/services/yara_engine/scanner.py, is one of the most sophisticated and critical components of the SentinelNexus platform. This module comprises 315 lines of Python code and is responsible for providing deep static behavioral analysis of files without ever needing to execute them — a capability that is essential for safely analyzing potentially dangerous malware samples.

Community Rule Management: Upon the very first initialization of the YARA engine, the module automatically clones the comprehensive Neo23x0/signature-base Git repository from GitHub into a local rules directory. This repository contains over one thousand professionally authored YARA rule files covering an enormous range of malware families, exploit kits, hacking tools, webshells, and suspicious code patterns maintained by the global cybersecurity community. On all subsequent initializations, the module performs a git pull operation to ensure that the latest rule updates are always available. This entire download and update process is wrapped in robust error handling: if the gitpython library is not installed, or if the network connection is unavailable, the engine gracefully falls back to its built-in rules without crashing. The implementation iterates through every .yar file found in the repository's yara subdirectory, reads each file's content, and filters out any rules that reference external YARA modules (such as the "magic" module) that may not be available on all systems. Each rule file is assigned a unique namespace derived from its filename and parent directory to prevent naming collisions during compilation.

Built-In Fallback Rules: In addition to the thousands of community rules, the engine defines six hardcoded built-in YARA rules directly in the source code. These rules are always available regardless of network connectivity and cover the most common and critical threat patterns: the EICAR antivirus test file (used for verifying that the scanning pipeline is functional), obfuscated PowerShell invocations (detecting the use of EncodedCommand, ExecutionPolicy Bypass, DownloadString, and IEX patterns), bash reverse shell commands (detecting bash -i and /dev/tcp/ patterns), hardcoded credentials in source files (detecting password=, passwd=, secret_key=, and api_key= patterns), base64-encoded shellcode (detecting unusually large base64 blobs that are characteristic of encoded payloads), and embedded executable magic bytes (detecting ELF header 7F 45 4C 46 and PE header 4D 5A byte sequences embedded inside non-executable files).

Rule Compilation: All community and built-in rules are compiled together into a single, high-performance compiled rule object using the yara.compile() function with a sources dictionary mapping namespace names to rule content. This compiled object is loaded once at module import time and stored as a module-level variable, meaning the expensive compilation process only occurs once during the entire application lifecycle. Subsequent scan requests use the pre-compiled rules from memory, providing extremely fast scan performance. If compilation fails due to a problematic community rule (which can occasionally happen when community repositories contain experimental or broken rules), the engine automatically falls back to compiling only the built-in rules, ensuring that scanning capability is never completely lost.

File Scanning Process: When the scan_file() function is called with a file path, it performs a comprehensive multi-step analysis. First, it reads the entire file into memory as raw bytes. Second, it computes three separate cryptographic hash fingerprints of the file simultaneously: MD5 (for legacy system compatibility), SHA-1 (for intermediate compatibility), and SHA-256 (for modern security applications and VirusTotal lookups). Third, it passes the raw file bytes to the compiled YARA rules for pattern matching, providing file metadata (filepath, filename, and extension) as external variables that some YARA rules can use for contextual matching. The scan operation has a thirty-second timeout to prevent individual files from hanging the entire scanning pipeline. Fourth, for each YARA rule that matches, the engine extracts the rule name, the rule's namespace (which identifies whether it came from a community source or the built-in set), any tags associated with the rule, the rule's metadata dictionary (which typically includes a severity classification and a human-readable description), and the specific string identifiers and byte offset locations where the match occurred within the file. All of this information is returned as a structured Python dictionary.

Directory Scanning: The scan_directory() function provides recursive directory scanning capability. It walks the entire directory tree using Python's pathlib.rglob() method, optionally filtering by file extension (for example, scanning only .exe, .dll, and .py files). Files larger than ten megabytes are automatically skipped to prevent memory exhaustion. Each qualifying file is passed through the scan_file() function, and the complete list of results is returned.

5.2.2 VirusTotal Multi-Engine Consensus Module (lookup.py)

The VirusTotal integration module, located in backend/app/services/virustotal/lookup.py, provides the platform's global threat intelligence validation capability. This module connects SentinelNexus to the world's largest collaborative malware intelligence network by querying the VirusTotal API v3.

The lookup_hash() function accepts a SHA-256 hash string (generated by the YARA engine's file scanning process) and constructs a structured HTTP GET request to the VirusTotal files endpoint. The request includes the API key in the x-apikey header for authentication. The implementation handles every possible API response scenario with graceful error handling: if the VT_API_KEY environment variable is not set, the function returns a structured "skipped" result with an explanatory error message rather than crashing. If the VirusTotal API returns an HTTP 404 status code (indicating the hash is not found in VirusTotal's database), the function returns a clean "not found" result. If the API returns an HTTP 401 (invalid API key) or HTTP 429 (rate limit exceeded on the free tier, which allows only four requests per minute), the function returns an appropriately descriptive error. For successful responses (HTTP 200), the function parses the extensive JSON response and extracts the critical intelligence metrics: the total number of detection engines that analyzed the hash, the number of engines that flagged it as malicious or suspicious ("positives"), the community-suggested threat classification label (such as "trojan.generic" or "ransomware.wannacry"), and a list of the specific engine names and their individual verdicts (capped at twenty engines to prevent data overload).

The lookup_hashes() function provides batch processing capability. It iterates through a list of SHA-256 hashes (collected from YARA scan results) and queries each one sequentially against VirusTotal. To respect the free-tier rate limit of four requests per minute, the function implements a fifteen-second delay between consecutive API calls using Python's time.sleep(). This ensures that the platform remains within VirusTotal's usage policies even when processing multiple suspicious files in a single scan cycle.

5.2.3 SQLite Correlated Memory Store Framework (db.py)

The persistent memory framework, implemented in backend/app/services/memory/db.py across 163 lines of carefully structured Python code, forms the foundational "memory" of the SentinelNexus platform. This module replaces the conceptual "FAISS + SQLite" design described in earlier planning documents with a practical, honest, single-database SQLite implementation that reliably achieves all required persistence and correlation objectives.

Schema Design: The database schema is bootstrapped automatically on first connection using a CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS pattern, ensuring the database initializes itself cleanly on any fresh deployment. The schema consists of two core tables. The incidents table contains eight columns: id (a UUID-based primary key), timestamp (ISO 8601 formatted creation time), type (the category of incident, such as "malware_detection," "yara_detection," or "vulnerability"), severity (normalized to "critical," "high," "medium," or "low"), scanner (the name of the originating detection engine), title (a human-readable summary), details (a JSON-serialized dictionary containing all supplementary metadata), and status (either "open" or "resolved"). Three database indexes are created on the status, severity, and timestamp columns to ensure fast query performance even as the incident count grows into the thousands. The patterns table contains five columns: signature (a composite string primary key formatted as "scanner:identifier," such as "clamav:/path/to/trojan" or "cve:CVE-2023-44487"), first_seen (the timestamp of the initial detection), last_seen (the timestamp of the most recent detection), hit_count (an integer tracking how many times this specific signature has been observed), and severity.

Incident Write Logic: The add_incident() function generates a unique eight-character uppercase identifier using Python's uuid.uuid4() function, records the current UTC timestamp, and inserts a new row into the incidents table. The function accepts the incident's type, severity, scanner name, title, and an optional details dictionary (which is JSON-serialized for storage). This function is called by the ThreatSentinel Correlator every time a new threat event is generated.

Pattern Upsert Logic: The update_pattern() function implements the critical deduplication mechanism that differentiates SentinelNexus from traditional SIEM systems. When called with a signature string and severity level, it first queries the patterns table to check if a record with that exact signature already exists. If the signature is found (indicating a recurring, previously seen threat), the function executes an UPDATE statement that refreshes the last_seen timestamp to the current time and increments the hit_count by one. If the signature is not found (indicating a first-time observation), it executes an INSERT statement creating a new pattern record with hit_count initialized to one. This elegant upsert pattern ensures that repeated detections of the same threat strengthen the system's awareness rather than cluttering the dashboard with duplicate alerts.

Incident Resolution: The resolve_incident() function allows analysts to close resolved incidents by updating the status from "open" to "resolved" and recording the resolution timestamp. This function is exposed through the FastAPI API and called by the frontend dashboard when an analyst marks an incident as handled.

Statistical Queries: The get_stats() function provides aggregate metrics used by the dashboard's summary panels: total incident count, open incident count, resolved incident count, number of recurring patterns (those with hit_count greater than one), and the top five most frequently recurring patterns ranked by hit count. These real-time statistics give analysts an immediate bird's-eye view of the system's threat landscape.

5.2.4 The ThreatSentinel Correlator Logic (correlator.py)

The ThreatSentinel Correlation Engine, implemented in backend/app/services/threat_sentinel/correlator.py across 202 lines of Python code, represents the analytical heart and central intelligence hub of SentinelNexus. This module is responsible for transforming raw, fragmented scanner outputs into unified, prioritized, and actionable ThreatEvent objects.

Multi-Source Ingestion: The correlator implements three specialized ingestion functions, each designed to parse the specific JSON output format of its corresponding scanner pipeline. The _ingest_malware() function reads the ClamAV malware status file and the YARA results file from the scans directory. For each ClamAV detection, it creates a ThreatEvent with the type "malware_detection," assigns a severity based on the malware risk score using the _sev_from_score() normalizer (scores above 80 map to "critical," 60-79 to "high," 30-59 to "medium," and below 30 to "low"), and writes both an incident record and a pattern record to the SQLite memory store. For each YARA rule match found in the YARA results, it creates a separate ThreatEvent with the type "yara_detection," using the severity specified in the YARA rule's metadata. The _ingest_vulnerabilities() function reads the Trivy vulnerability scan results from the latest.json file. It iterates through every vulnerability found in every scan result, normalizes the severity string, and creates a ThreatEvent for each one. Critical and high-severity vulnerabilities are also persisted to the SQLite database. The _ingest_wazuh() function reads any locally stored Wazuh alerts and converts them into ThreatEvents using a numeric severity mapping (Wazuh severity 10 or above maps to "critical," 7-9 to "high," 5-6 to "medium," and below 5 to "low").

Severity-First Sorting: After all sources have been ingested, the correlator sorts the complete list of ThreatEvents using a dual-key sorting algorithm. The primary sort key is severity (critical events first, low events last), and the secondary sort key is timestamp (newest events first within the same severity level). This ensures that when the frontend displays the event list, the most dangerous and most recent threats are always at the very top of the analyst's attention.

Snapshot Persistence: The correlated event list is serialized to JSON and written to the threat_events.json file, which serves as a cache for the frontend dashboard. The get_events() function checks for this cached file before running a full correlation cycle, providing fast response times for dashboard refreshes between scan cycles.

5.2.5 The PatchMaster Remediation Module (advisor.py)

The PatchMaster module, implemented in backend/app/services/patchmaster/advisor.py across 130 lines of Python code, closes the critical gap between vulnerability detection and remediation that exists in all traditional security systems. While existing systems stop at telling the analyst "you have a vulnerability," PatchMaster goes significantly further by telling them exactly how to fix it.

Package Manager Detection: The _pkg_mgr() function implements a comprehensive package ecosystem identification algorithm. It analyzes the package type string provided by the Trivy scanner (such as "pip," "npm," "debian," "ruby-gems," or "cargo") and maps it to one of seven supported package managers. The function also implements fallback heuristics for edge cases: if the package type string is ambiguous but the package name starts with "python3-" or "lib," it defaults to the apt package manager, as these naming conventions are characteristic of Debian system packages.

Command Generation: The _fix_command() function takes the identified package manager, the package name, and the fixed version number (if known) as inputs, and generates the precise terminal command required to remediate the vulnerability. For pip, it generates "pip install --upgrade packagename==version." For npm, it generates "npm install packagename@version." For apt, it generates "sudo apt-get install --only-upgrade packagename." For yum, it generates "sudo yum update packagename." It similarly supports gem, cargo, and go ecosystems. If the package manager cannot be identified, it generates a human-readable fallback instruction asking the analyst to update manually.

Recommendation Assembly: The get_recommendations() function reads the latest vulnerability scan results, iterates through all discovered vulnerabilities, deduplicates them by CVE identifier (using a Python set to track seen CVEs), and assembles a comprehensive list of remediation recommendation objects. Each recommendation contains the CVE identifier, severity level, package name, installed version, fixed version (or "No fix available yet" if no upstream fix exists), a human-readable vulnerability title, the identified package manager, the generated fix command, a reference URL to the official vulnerability advisory, and a boolean can_auto_patch flag indicating whether the system has enough information to potentially automate the fix. The recommendations are sorted by severity (critical first) before being returned.

5.2.6 The Risk Scoring Engine (scorer.py)

The Risk Scoring Engine, implemented in backend/app/services/risk_engine/scorer.py across 120 lines of Python code, provides the platform's headline metric: a single, deterministic 0-to-100 risk score that quantifies the overall security posture of the monitored environment.

Multi-Factor Scoring Breakdown: The compute_risk_score() function reads scan results from every available source and computes an additive, weighted risk score. ClamAV infections contribute up to 35 points (15 base points plus 10 points per additional infection). YARA rule hits contribute up to 25 points (5 points per hit). VirusTotal positive detections contribute up to 20 points (3 points per positive). Vulnerability counts contribute up to 15 points (3 points per critical CVE plus 1 point per high CVE). Wazuh high-severity alerts contribute up to 5 points. Each category has a hard cap to prevent any single source from dominating the total score, and the final score is clamped to the 0-100 range.

Human-Readable Labels: Based on the computed score, the engine assigns a categorical label and a corresponding color code: scores of 75 and above receive "CRITICAL" status with a red color indicator and a recommendation for immediate incident response. Scores of 50 to 74 receive "HIGH" status with an orange indicator. Scores of 25 to 49 receive "MEDIUM" status with a yellow indicator. Scores below 25 receive "LOW" status with a green indicator and a recommendation to maintain regular scanning schedules.

5.2.7 The Automated Scan Pipeline (auto_scanner.py)

The automated scan pipeline, implemented in backend/auto_scanner.py across 310 lines of Python code, serves as the autonomous orchestration engine that ties all individual scanning modules together into a continuous, self-operating security pipeline.

Concurrent Execution: The pipeline uses Python's ThreadPoolExecutor to execute multiple independent scanners in parallel within each scan cycle. During a vulnerability scan, OSV, Trivy, and Semgrep are all launched simultaneously as separate threads, dramatically reducing the total scan duration compared to sequential execution. The results are collected and merged into a unified JSON structure that includes the timestamp, the list of scanned directories, and the combined results from all three scanners.

Full Malware Pipeline: The run_malware_scan() function orchestrates a four-step sequential pipeline: Step 1 runs ClamAV to detect known malware signatures. Step 2 collects audit system logs. Step 3 runs the YARA engine to perform behavioral static analysis. Step 4 extracts SHA-256 hashes from all files that produced YARA matches and submits them to VirusTotal for global intelligence validation. After all four steps complete, the function calculates a composite malware risk score and verdict, generates context-aware recommendations, and persists the complete results to disk.

Scheduling: The start_scheduler() function configures APScheduler to automatically execute the various scan pipelines on recurring intervals and also launches all pipelines immediately in daemon background threads upon application startup.

5.2.8 UI/UX React Framework and the Blue Team AI Copilot

The presentation layer of SentinelNexus is built as a modern, responsive Single Page Application using React and Vite. The frontend makes extensive use of React's useEffect and useState hooks to perform periodic asynchronous polling against the FastAPI backend endpoints. Each dashboard component (Risk Score display, Telemetry Charts, Incident Tables, Detection Lists, PatchMaster Recommendations) independently fetches its data from the corresponding API route and updates its visual state in real time.

For the AI integration, we implemented two complementary backend modules. The ai_router.py module implements the Ollama-based local LLM integration for privacy-sensitive deployments. It constructs a detailed system prompt that establishes the Copilot's persona as an expert SOC analyst assistant, defines behavioral rules (such as never executing commands directly, always referencing specific CVE IDs and package names, and redirecting out-of-scope questions), and injects real-time scan context by reading the latest vulnerability counts, malware verdicts, ClamAV infection details, YARA hit counts, VirusTotal positives, and open incident summaries directly from the backend data stores. This enriched prompt is sent to the local Ollama API endpoint, and the model's response is returned to the frontend chat interface. The routes.py module provides an alternative Gemini-based AI endpoint that uses Google's cloud API for enhanced intelligence, following the same context-injection pattern. Both modules ensure that the AI is always grounded in the real-time facts of the local network environment, preventing hallucinated or generic responses and providing the analyst with a genuinely knowledgeable artificial security assistant.






CHAPTER 6
RESULT

6.1 Overview of Implementation Success

The comprehensive implementation of the backend analytical pipeline, combined with the real-time React dashboard, demonstrates a fully operational, integrated cybersecurity posture. The system successfully executed end-to-end autonomous security cycles: from autonomously downloading community-sourced YARA rules and scanning files, to submitting hashes for VirusTotal reputation consensus, and calculating a unified Risk Score based on active vulnerabilities and detected malware. 

By unifying all of these streams into the SQLite continuous memory database, the ThreatSentinel correlator accurately filters the noise typically generated by isolated tools. The integration of the PatchMaster advisor proved capable of accurately converting raw CVE findings into immediate, actionable command-line remediation tasks. Finally, the Blue Team Copilot reliably demonstrated the ability to query this aggregated backend state and communicate the system's defensive status clearly in plain language.

6.2 Visual Results and System Output

*(Note for editor: Please insert the necessary screenshots in this section to visually demonstrate the results.)*

[INSERT IMAGE HERE - SentinelNexus General Dashboard]
*Description: A view of the main React Dashboard showing the active Risk Score, Telemetry graphs (CPU/Memory distribution), and the top active Threat Events.*

[INSERT IMAGE HERE - Active Detections/Malware Analysis]
*Description: The specialized Malware viewing screen showing the integration of ClamAV results combined with YARA rule trigger tags and multi-engine VirusTotal consensus metrics.*

[INSERT IMAGE HERE - Incident Memory and Vulnerabilities]
*Description: The VulnEye table interface demonstrating the list of identified CVEs alongside the PatchMaster remediation commands (e.g., `pip install --upgrade package`) rendered for the analyst.*

[INSERT IMAGE HERE - Blue Team Copilot Chat Interface]
*Description: An example of the analyst interacting with the AI Copilot through the UI, receiving an explanation of a recent YARA hit or a summary of the current critical CVEs.*


6.3 Critical Code Extracts from Our Implementation

Below are the most crucial code logic snippets from our underlying architecture. Included here are extracts from the final codebase to demonstrate the mechanism of our integrated solution.

**Code Snippet 1: The YARA Engine and Community Downloader**
This excerpt portrays our mechanism for capturing the latest community signatures dynamically, assuring the static behavioral analysis is always up to date prior to compilation.
*Snippet location reference: backend/app/services/yara_engine/scanner.py*
```python
def _download_community_rules(self):
    print("[YaraEngine] Checking for community rules at:", self.rules_dir)
    if not os.path.exists(self.rules_dir):
        print("[YaraEngine] Downloading Neo23x0/signature-base via git...")
        try:
            repo = git.Repo.clone_from(self.repo_url, self.rules_dir, depth=1)
            print("[YaraEngine] Successfully downloaded community rules.")
        except Exception as e:
            print(f"[YaraEngine] Warning: Git clone failed: {e}")
    else:
        try:
            repo = git.Repo(self.rules_dir)
            origin = repo.remotes.origin
            origin.pull()
            print("[YaraEngine] Pulled latest community rule updates.")
        except Exception as e:
            print(f"[YaraEngine] Warning: Could not pull latest rules: {e}")
```

**Code Snippet 2: Vulnerability Correlation & PatchMaster Synthesis**
This logic demonstrates how scattered vulnerability results from the Trivy wrapper are mapped into actionable advice via our Custom Advisor class.
*Snippet location reference: backend/app/services/patchmaster/advisor.py*
```python
def get_remediation_advice(self, cve_id: str, ecosystem: str = None) -> dict:
    vuln_data = self._read_latest()
    
    for v in vuln_data.get("vulnerabilities", []):
        if v.get("id") == cve_id:
            pkg = v.get("package", "Unknown")
            
            eco = ecosystem or ""
            if not eco and "python" in v.get("target", "").lower():
                eco = "PyPI"
            
            command = ""
            if eco.lower() in ["pypi", "pip"]:
                command = f"pip install --upgrade {pkg}"
            elif eco.lower() in ["npm"]:
                command = f"npm update {pkg}"
            elif eco.lower() in ["apt", "debian", "ubuntu"]:
                command = f"apt-get install --only-upgrade {pkg}"
            
            return {
                "cve_id": cve_id,
                "package": pkg,
                "action": "Update package",
                "command": command,
                "reference": f"https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/{cve_id}"
            }
    return {"error": "CVE not found or no remediation mapped"}
```

**Code Snippet 3: The Persistent Storage Memory Integration**
This excerpt highlights how the system transitions from ephemeral alerts to persistent, auditable intelligence, resolving identical issues without duplicating noise for the user.
*Snippet location reference: backend/app/services/memory/db.py*
```python
def add_incident(self, title: str, severity: str, source: str, details: str = "") -> str:
    with sqlite3.connect(self.db_path) as conn:
        cursor = conn.cursor()
        incident_id = f"INC-{int(time.time())}"
        cursor.execute(
            """INSERT INTO incidents 
               (id, timestamp, title, severity, status, source, details)
               VALUES (?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?)""",
            (incident_id, datetime.utcnow().isoformat(), title, severity, "Open", source, details)
        )
        conn.commit()
        return incident_id
```
\n

CHAPTER 7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE

7.1 Conclusion

The realized platform successfully delivers an autonomous, intelligent cybersecurity solution that effectively addresses the critical limitations inherent in legacy, fragmented security setups. By integrating advanced analytical techniques—from signature matching and YARA behavioral profiling to VirusTotal intelligence consensus—the system fulfills a crucial industry need for a unified platform that automates detection, correlation, response, and explainability.

The seamless flow of data from specialized AI agents into the SQLite persistent Memory Database and the ThreatSentinel correlator proves that security software can dramatically minimize alert fatigue and "black-box" guessing. The integration of PatchMaster, which translates found vulnerabilities into exact terminal commands, closes the loop on vulnerability management. Furthermore, the inclusion of the Blue Team Copilot proves that Language Models can be effectively used securely as translational assistants, explaining technical logs to human analysts in clear language effortlessly. 

The finalized architecture transforms cybersecurity from a resource-intensive, disorganized manual process into an efficient, unified, and autonomous defense mechanism prepared for modern threats.

7.2 Future Scope

1. Expanded AI Threat Detection
The AI agents should be enhanced to identify emerging threats, including zero-day and highly sophisticated cyber attacks. This will involve integrating advanced models focused on network and behavioral anomaly detection to improve predictive accuracy.

2. Continuous Adaptive Learning
The system requires the implementation of self-improving models that learn without needing manual tuning or interruptions. This ensures the platform's threat baseline remains current and allows for persistent adaptation to new adversarial tactics.

3. Broadened Environment Support
The system's defensive capabilities must be extended to cover non-traditional areas like IoT devices and cloud-native applications. Furthermore, focus should be placed on integrating specialized security for critical infrastructure sectors.

4. Multilingual LLM Support
The Blue Team Copilot needs to be upgraded with multilingual LLM support. This expansion enables interaction and response delivery in multiple languages to better serve diverse global security teams.

5. Dynamic Red Team Simulation
The simulation capability should be developed into a fully dynamic Red Team Simulator module that continuously runs automated attack campaigns to actively test detection and response mechanisms.

6. Enhanced Remediation Automation
Currently, remediation commands are generated for human execution. Future iteration involves handling automated remediation execution (hyperautomation), executing updates over SSH directly on downstream endpoints safely.
\n\nREFERENCES
[1] A. Bensaoud, J. Kalita, and M. Bensaoud, “A survey of malware detection using deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19153, 2024.
[2] K. Bennouk, M. El Yazid, and A. El Omri, “A comprehensive review and assessment of cybersecurity vulnerability detection methodologies,” Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy, vol. 4, no. 4, p. 40, 2024.
[3] P. Santos, R. Martins, F. Rodriguez, and A. Kumar, “A systematic review of cyber threat intelligence: The effectiveness of technologies, strategies, and collaborations in combating modern threats,” Sensors, vol. 25, no. 14, p. 4272, 2025.
[4] A. Dijk, R. Meier, and C. Melella, “Next steps in cyber blue team automation—Leveraging the power of large language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cyber Conflict (CyCon 2025), Tallinn, Estonia, 2025. (Available: https://roland-meier.ch/files/2025_CyCon_AI.pdf)
[5] A. Bilot, N. El Madhoun, K. Al Agha, and A. Zouaoui, “A survey on malware detection with graph representation learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16004, 2023.
[6] N. Shiri Harzevili et al., “A survey on automated software vulnerability detection using machine learning and deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11673, 2023.
[7] Y. Zhang, “Context and multi-features-based vulnerability detection (CMFVD),” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 5, p. 1351, 2024.
[8] “Benchmarking LLMs in an embodied environment for blue-team threat hunting (CyberTeam),” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11901, 2025.
[9] D. Rethink (N. Prasad), “A survey of cyber threat attribution: challenges, techniques and future directions,” Forensic Science & Security Survey, 2025. *(survey article — see SciDirect)*
[10] S. Asiri, Y. Xiao, S. Alzahrani, and T. Li, “PhishingRTDS: A real-time detection system for phishing attacks using a deep learning model,” Computers & Security, vol. 141, p. 103843, 2024.
[11] A. Ramathilagam, R. Palanikumar, P. Raghavan, P. Gopikannan, K. Manikandan, and V. G. S. V., “Comprehensive survey of deep learning-based intrusion detection and prevention systems for secure communication in the Internet of Things,” Int. J. Intelligent Systems and Applications in Engineering, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1822–1828, 2024.
[12] “A survey of vulnerability detection techniques and insights,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07049, 2025.
[13] M. Altaiy, İ. Yıldız, and B. Uçan, “Malware detection using deep learning algorithms,” Aurum Eng. Syst. & Archit. J., pp. 11–26, 2023.
[14] “Rethinking cybersecurity red and blue teaming in the age of LLMs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13434, 2025.
[15] IBM X-Force, “IBM X-Force Threat Intelligence Index 2025,” IBM Corp., 2025.